---
title: "Large Format 3D Printer (LF3DP)"
excerpt: "This is a new and imporved way to design a podium , utilizing generative design"
header:
  image: /assets/img/phonecase.PNG
  teaser: /assets/img/iPhone13Assemblyrender2.png
gallery:
  - image_path: assets/img/phonecaseiterations.PNG
   
---

## Generative Design and LF3DP in Residential Construction
Generative Design (GD) is a design exploration process that harnesses the power of artificial intelligence to create new and improved designs. The designs are high-performance iterations that can benefit manufacturing hurdles such as reducing the component weight and manufacturing cost. The build itself is also beneficial as it can solve complex challenges, optimize performance, and can scale up or down based on the user's needs. Parameters such as performance and spatial requirements are the main factors taken into consideration when generative design is being used. The AI software explores multiple renditions of the same design and outputs the most effective with slight alterations also available. It learns from previous iterations what is optimal and what is not and improves on the downfalls to make the design that much better. The process starts with an initial idea based on design parameters set by the designer, leading to the AI generating the model. Rule algorithms are how each detail in the design is chosen to create the first prototype for the generative design. This model is then judged by the designer and slight alterations are made to the parameters to get closer to the desired final product. This leads to an increasingly refined feedback loop that eventually leads to a highly optimized solution. These solutions can solve an extensive range of engineering problems that are present in everyday life. Benefits of generative design that make it superior to other design methods include simultaneous exploration, an accelerated design timeline, and the ability to create super complex designs.
Large Format 3D Printing (LF3DP) is an industrial-scale 3D printing process that prints objects that are traditionally machined or molded on a massive scale. They can produce prints in the scale of meters or feet instead of the millimeters or inches that most 3D manufacturing processes scale in. The benefits of Large Format 3D Printers include being much more cost-effective than the traditional 3D printing processes. Additionally, this process format can produce complex geometries that would normally require multiple parts, assembly, and prints to create. Having all the components in one system lowers the production and the amount of marital used, which lowers the production cost. Large-format 3D printing originated in Oak Ridge National Labs, which has a plant in the Tennessee area. They are a US Department of Energy research facility that focuses on premier research projects. These projects are made successful by empowering leaders and teams to pursue breakthroughs in an environment marked by operational excellence and engagement in the communities of the surrounding areas, such as Vanderbilt. Since they are the creators, it only makes sense they have the largest Large Format 3D Printer available. The Big Area Additive Machine (BAAM) at Oak Ridge can deposit a whooping 36+ kilos of material an hour. The machine is capable of printing parts up to 6.5 feet wide, 8 feet tall, and 13 feet long. The first version of the BAAM was made operational in 2014 and improvements to the machine have only been made since then. The latest model contains two hoppers, multiple dryers, and a conglomeration of lines to extruders that lead to different printable materials. In 2017, an entire car was printed showing the extensive and complex capabilities of the printer. The printing time efficiency of the BAAM is especially seen when it comes to making molds for objects like airplane wings or cladding for high-rise buildings. Usually, these molds are made using gigantic wood molds that can take months to create. The BAAM allows these molds to be created in mere days.
One problem that is prevalent in the residential construction and architecture business is the creation of reliable and durable parts that make buildings safe enough to live in for hundreds of years. Architecture has been an art form that has been present for thousands of years so many steps have been taken in the right direction to make this process as smooth and efficient as possible. However, as population and human need increase as time goes on, the current architectural abilities are limited by time, money, and resources to account the future needs. That is where Generative Design and Large Format 3D printing come in. Generative Design when it comes to architecture is a new method of design that leads designers to discover unexpected novel designs. Additionally, new trade-offs between high-performing designs and goals for the design are now able to become a reality, as humans and computers have never been more integrated before than during this process. This means complex structural ideas that could take months if not years of planning can take days to solve once the problem is presented with the right parameters. For example, in the Netherlands, the startup company MX3D joined forces with Autodesk, Heijmans, and Laarman Lab to create a pedestrian bridge created out of 3D-printed steel. The team set parameters of the desired size and strength of the steel bridge to begin the process. After the final shape was chosen, digital simulations of the bridge were created. Next, along with generative algorithms, they were able to produce successive design iterations that became more successful, one after another. These algorithms were taught where the crucial parts of the bridge were and were told to focus on those areas. They were able to make a functioning bridge on an expedited timeline which is the future of architecture. In terms of Large Format 3D printing, architecture takes significant use in this method of 3D orienting as most architectural structures will be of an exceptional size. The closer the size of the model is to the actual build, the better the designer can visualize and conceptualize the volumes and overall material needed for the build. This not only saves time in deciding the size and shape of the new building but allows budget planning exceedingly early in the building process, which saves money down the road. Although both methods benefit residential structures, future innovations are still required to make the building as efficient as possible. Having a Large Format 3D printer bigger than the BAAM at Oak Ridge is one-way entire buildings can be printed and be able to be lived in almost immediately. As technology advances, this may become a possibility in our lifetime. Additionally, having more complex and advanced AI will only make the generative design process much faster and more efficient. Investing in AI that is as intelligent as humanly possible is how generative design can be made even better in the future.

## CAD Model
<iframe src="https://vanderbilt643.autodesk360.com/shares/public/SH512d4QTec90decfa6e5381a356bd818587?mode=embed" width="800" height="600" allowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true"  frameborder="0"></iframe>
